---
layout     : publication
categories : publications
title      : "Modelling of psoriasis patient flows for the reconfiguration of secondary care services and treatments"
date       : 2015-05-08
journal    : Health Systems
authors    : Kayne Putman, Alex Anstey, Paul R Harper and Vince A Knight
keywords   : hospitals; health service; dermatology; simulation; psoriasis
pub_url    : http://www.palgrave-journals.com/hs/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/hs20154a.html
comments   : true
---

Here's the abstract of the paper:

This paper describes work in collaboration with a large dermatology directorate
in South Wales to map out current patient flow and activity levels for
psoriasis management. Psoriasis is a chronic skin disease that often has a high
impact on patient quality of life. Clinical services for patients with moderate
to severe psoriasis tend to be located in secondary care hospitals. The range
of services that were studied, their geographical location in relation to the
distribution of population, and the population demographics in this health
board were not unique; similar profiles for these factors can be found
throughout the NHS in England and Wales. The model was created to analyse
patient flow through different therapies, with the aim of maximising throughput
of patients, eliminating bottlenecks, improving patient access to services and
improving patient safety. It was shown that reducing waiting times and
improving access to phototherapy would lower overall service costs, as fewer
patients would subsequently require systemic and biologic therapies. The model
has been used to quantify how recent year-on-year increases in overall spend on
psoriasis treatments might be slowed and eventually halted. This would require
reallocation of notional cost-savings generated by reducing the rate of
increase in the drug spend to fund the development of a more balanced and
accessible network of more basic psoriasis services.
