---
authors:
- Kayne Putman
- Alex Anstey
- Paul Harper
- Vincent Knight
details: Health Systems
direct_url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1057/hs.2015.4
keywords:
- healthcare
- patient flow
- simulation
published_date: 2015
tags:
- article
title: Modelling of psoriasis patient flows for the reconfiguration of secondary care
  services and treatments
---

**Abstract:** This paper describes work in collaboration with a large
dermatology directorate in South Wales to map out current patient flow and
activity levels for psoriasis management. Psoriasis is a chronic skin disease
that often has a high impact on patient quality of life. Clinical services for
patients with moderate to severe psoriasis tend to be located in secondary care
hospitals. The range of services that were studied, their geographical location
in relation to the distribution of population, and the population demographics
in this health board were not unique; similar profiles for these factors can be
found throughout the NHS in England and Wales. The model was created to analyse
patient flow through different therapies, with the aim of maximising throughput
of patients, eliminating bottlenecks, improving patient access to services and
improving patient safety. It was shown that reducing waiting times and improving
access to phototherapy would lower overall service costs, as fewer patients
would subsequently require systemic and biologic therapies. The model has been
used to quantify how recent year-on-year increases in overall spend on psoriasis
treatments might be slowed and eventually halted. This would require
reallocation of notional cost-savings generated by reducing the rate of increase
in the drug spend to fund the development of a more balanced and accessible
network of more basic psoriasis services.

```bibtex
@article{putman2015modelling,
  title   = {Modelling of psoriasis patient flows for the reconfiguration of
             secondary care services and treatments},
  author  = {Putman, Kayne and Anstey, Alex and Harper, Paul R. and
             Knight, Vincent A.},
  journal = {Health Systems},
  year    = {2015},
  doi     = {10.1057/hs.2015.4},
  url     = {https://link.springer.com/article/10.1057/hs.2015.4},
}
```
